HARI SREENIVASAN: Good evening.
I'm Hari Sreenivasan. Gwen Ifill
and Judy Woodruff are away.
On the "NewsHour" tonight:
Britain's prime minister says a
bomb is a possible cause in
the mysterious plane crash above
Sinai, but Russia and Egypt deny
those claims.
Also ahead: inside America's
nuclear arsenal. We take a look
at it's newest $8 billion
upgrade.
MAJ. GEN. GARRETT HARENCAK, U.S.
Air Force: We're bringing this
weapon to the 21st century.
We're bringing it to 2015. We
are updating its components.
We're making it safer, more
secure, and we're making
it more effective.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Plus, George
H.W. Bush reveals what he really
thinks about Dick Cheney and
Donald Rumsfeld in Jon Meacham's
new biography on the former
president.
JON MEACHAM, Author, "Destiny
and Power: The American Odyssey
of George Herbert Walker
Bush": George H.W. Bush said
that he believed that Cheney was
responsible for a good bit
of that hawkish image and that
he wished that Cheney had not
had as much influence, that
he -- that Dick Cheney should
have had his -- quote -- "own
State Department."
HARI SREENIVASAN: All that and
more on tonight's "PBS
NewsHour."
(BREAK)
HARI SREENIVASAN: The crash of a
Russian jetliner in Egypt
morphed into an international
dispute
today on whether a bomb was
behind it. All 224 people on
board were killed when the plane
broke up Saturday, just 23
minutes after taking of from
Sharm el-Sheikh.
Now the leaders of Britain,
Russia and Egypt are openly
disagreeing about the cause.
DAVID CAMERON, British Prime
Minister: We cannot be certain
that the Russian airliner
was brought down by a terrorist
bomb. But it looks increasingly
likely that that was
the case.
HARI SREENIVASAN: British Prime
Minister David Cameron spent the
day defending his decision
to stop all British flights to
and from Sharm el-Sheikh in
Egypt, pending the crash
investigation.
DAVID CAMERON: The reason we
have acted before that is
because of the intelligence and
information
we had that gave us the concern
that it was more likely than not
it was a terrorist bomb.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Russian
officials insisted any talk that
a bomb destroyed the Metrojet
airliner is just speculation.
And the Russian Foreign Ministry
urged Britain to share any
intelligence it has.
MARIA ZAKHAROVA, Russian Foreign
Ministry (through translator):
Honestly, what's really
shocking is the realization that
the British government has some
kind of information that
could shed light on what
happened in the skies above
Egypt. That information, if it
exists,
and judging by the fact that the
head of the Foreign Office
pronounced it does exist, that
information was never shared
with the Russian side.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The Kremlin
said President Vladimir Putin
raised those concerns in a
phone call with Prime Minister
Cameron. Meanwhile, Egypt's
government maintained the crash
of
the Russian jet -- quote --
"wasn't a terror act." And under
a new law, news organizations
there that report anything to
contrary could face hefty fines.
The Egyptian president, Abdel
Fattah El-Sisi, was in London
today to meet with Cameron.
El-Sisi has warned against
expecting much from the
investigation anytime soon. But
he
said British security teams
checked Sharm el-Sheikh's
airport 10 months ago and would
be welcome to do so again.
ABDEL FATTAH EL-SISI, Egyptian
President (through translator):
I understand that the prime
minister
wants to be assured of his
citizens' well-being. This is
his right. We're prepared to
cooperate
further with any procedures that
reassure all our friends that
the security measures
in place at Sharm el-Sheikh
airport are enough and that the
airport is safe to a good
standard.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Stepped-up
security screenings were in
evidence at the Red Sea resort's
airport
today. Thousands of tourists
remained stranded there, after
Ireland, Germany and the
Netherlands
followed Britain's lead and also
suspended their flights. Later,
British carriers Monarch
and EasyJet announced they will
begin evacuation flights to
Sharm el-Sheikh tomorrow with
official
approval to bring the
vacationers home. That process
could take up to 10 days.
In Washington, President Obama
said U.S. officials are taking
-- quote -- "very seriously" the
possibility that a bomb
destroyed the Russian plane.
The death toll from a factory
collapse in Pakistan rose to at
least 20 today. Some 200
workers were believed to be
inside the four-story building
when it gave way overnight in
Lahore.
Rescuers painstakingly searched
the rubble for signs of
survivors and used heavy
machinery
to clear debris. Some of those
trapped used cell phones to call
for help.
So far, 102 people have been
pulled out alive. Survivors say
cracks had appeared in the walls
after a powerful
earthquake last week.
The European Union made a
striking forecast today, that
another three million migrants
could arrive next year. That
came as an estimated 25,000
people waited on Lesbos and
other Greek
islands, hoping a ferry
strike there will end.
Lindsey Hilsum of Independent
Television News filed this
report from Lesbos.
LINDSEY HILSUM: The Greek prime
minister and the president of
the European Parliament landed
in Lesbos this morning and were
immediately confronted with the
reality of the situation.
MARTIN SCHULZ, President,
European Parliament (through
translator): Just as we were
arriving
here with Mr. Tsipras, we saw
boats coming across the sea.
People were jumping into the
water and swimming to the beach.
We're truly facing a dramatic
situation here.
LINDSEY HILSUM: They went to see
a so-called hot spot, where new
arrivals are supposed
to be registered and sent on to
other wealthier E.U. countries.
ALEXIS TSIPRAS, Greek Prime
Minister: The key issue is to
not encourage these people
take the boat of death and to
take the risk to lose their
lives in the Aegean Sea. And
the only way is to give the hope
that someday they will have the
chance to be in this mechanism
for resettlement directly from
the Turkish coast to Europe.
LINDSEY HILSUM: Just a few yards
from the airport, we met the
Omira family from Damascus.
Sitting on the rocks in the
sunshine, they looked as if they
might be on holiday; 77-year-old
Omar is getting pretty
good at skimming stones.
Hard to imagine what they were
going through night before last,
as a people smuggler crammed
them into a boat on
the Turkish coast.
AMER OMIRA, Refugee: He told us
30 people only, then maybe 50
people, 70 people, I don't
know.
LINDSEY HILSUM: So you
were really crowded?
AMER OMIRA: Yes, yes, yes. We
told us -- no, it's very, very
dangerous. Then he brought
the gun, and pow, pow. If you
don't believe me, we will -- a
gun.
LINDSEY HILSUM: So he
threatened to shoot you?
AMER OMIRA: Yes, yes.
LINDSEY HILSUM: Around the port,
we found hundreds of people
stranded because the ferry
operators have been on strike
since Monday, so there's no way
to get to Athens.
They sleep in tents or on the
streets. The people here are
hoping to get on the ferry
to Athens tomorrow, when the
strike is over, but that's not
going to be an end to the
problem;
5,000 or 6,000 refugees and
migrants are turning up on the
Greek islands every day still,
100,000
here in Lesbos just in
the last three weeks.
In the background, Lesbos' own
Statue of Liberty, the brain
child of a local man who went to
New York years ago. He can't
imagine that, 85 years on, the
huddled masses would come
to his home island.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The United
Nations warned today that even
rough winter seas are not
likely to stop the waves of
migrants trying to reach Greece.
The U.S. House overwhelmingly
approved a $325 billion highway
bill today. It maintains current
levels of spending over six
years, amid concerns that aging
roads and bridges will need more
funding. It also includes a
provision to reauthorize the
Export-Import Bank. The House
version
must be reconciled with the
Senate's highway bill.
The U.S. and 11 other countries
released the text of a sweeping
Pacific Rim trade deal
today, setting up a fight in
Congress. The Trans-Pacific
Partnership was negotiated for
more than five years. The White
House says its eliminates some
18,000 taxes that other
countries impose on U.S.
exports. It also contains
provisions to discourage forced
labor
and provide rights
to workers overseas.
At the U.S. Capitol, the new
House speaker, Paul Ryan, said
lawmakers need time to digest
the thousands of pages.
REP. PAUL RYAN (R-WI), Speaker
of the House: I'm pleased with
the process we have coming
before us, open, transparent.
People get to see it, members of
Congress get to see it,
and then we will decided
independently after consulting
with our constituents and our
conscience
what our position on anything
like a trade agreement will be.
HARI SREENIVASAN: On the
Democratic side, presidential
hopeful Hillary Clinton and
others
have already come out
against the deal.
The reform Jewish movement in
the U.S. passed a far-reaching
resolution today in support
of transgender rights. Meeting
in Orlando, members of the Union
for Reform Judaism voted
for gender-neutral language and
bathrooms in their
congregations. The group has 1.5
million members. Other religious
bodies, including the Episcopal
Church and the United Church
of Christ, have approved
transgender resolutions, but
none has gone as far as this
one.
Wall Street had a quiet day,
ahead of the October jobs report
being released tomorrow.
The Dow Jones industrial average
lost four points to close at
17863. The Nasdaq fell
14 points, and the
S&P 500 dropped two.
And the National Toy Hall of
Fame has announced its class of
2015. The new inductees include
the classic party game Twister,
which Sears initially deemed too
racy to advertise in
1966, the high-powered Super
Soaker water gun also made the
hall, along with the puppet,
a toy that goes back thousands
of years. The board game
Battleship came up short this
year.
So did Wiffle balls and
Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
rising tensions in the South
China Sea; upgrades to U.S.
nuclear
weapons; a new book reveals
President George H.W. Bush's
criticisms of his son's
administration,
and much more.
Naval activity by the United
States prompted another negative
reaction from Beijing today,
as Pentagon Chief Ashton Carter
went on an unusual voyage with a
U.S. ally.
The fighter pilots on the U.S.
Theodore Roosevelt went about
their business today. But this
time, Defense Secretary Ash
Carter and his Malaysian
counterpart were on board
watching
as the aircraft carrier
plied the South China Sea.
The ship and its escort group
were moving some 150 nautical
miles south of the Spratly
Islands. They fall in a vast
area that's claimed by Beijing.
China also claims a 12-mile
territorial
zone around artificial islands
in the Spratlys, including
airstrips and other military
facilities.
A U.S. Navy destroyer challenged
that 12-mile zone last week.
Today, the Chinese Foreign
Ministry again criticized
the American actions.
HUA CHUNYING, Spokeswoman,
Chinese Ministry of Foreign
Affairs (through translator):
China
has consistently respected all
countries' freedom of navigation
under international
law. What we oppose is waving
the banner of freedom of
navigation to push forward the
militarization of the South
China Sea. We hope the relevant
actions and intentions of
the U.S. can be made more
open and transparent.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Just
yesterday, defense ministers
from Southeast Asia ended a
meeting
in Malaysia without issuing a
final statement. It was scrapped
after China objected to
mentioning
the sea dispute. Secretary
Carter was there.
ASHTON CARTER, U.S. Defense
Secretary: I reminded everyone
that the United States doesn't
take
sides in these maritime
disputes, but we do take the
side of peaceful resolution
under
international law.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Today, Carter
said his carrier visit is a
response to regional fears about
Chinese behavior.
He called it -- quote -- "a sign
of the critical role the United
States' military power plays
in a very consequential region."
U.S. officials say the Navy
means to continue challenging
the Chinese territorial claims,
on a regular basis.
Joining me now to help us
understand the United States'
recent activity in the South
China
Sea and what it means is Bonnie
Glaser, director of the China
Power Project at the Center for
Strategic and International
Studies in Washington.
So, first, how big a deal is
this, if Ash Carter gets on a
very nice ship and decides
to take a cruise in
territorially disputed waters?
BONNIE GLASER, Center for
Strategic and International
Studies: Well, Secretary Carter
has done this
previously, when he attended the
Shangri-La dialogue in June of
this year.
He was on a P-8 surveillance
aircraft flying over the Malacca
Straits. So it's not unusual
for the United States secretary
of defense to be on a military
platform out in the South
China Sea demonstrating to the
region that the United States
has an abiding interest
in peace and stability
in the region.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Is it a
provocative act to be in this
specific place at this time?
BONNIE GLASER: Undoubtedly, the
Chinese see it as a provocative
act, but I think that
the other nations in
the regions do not.
I think if you look at Malaysia,
Vietnam, the Philippines, the
other claimants, they
are very happy to see the United
States' flag shown in the
region. They supported the
United
States exercising freedom of
navigation around what is called
Subi Reef, which is the
elevation,
the low-tide elevation that the
USS Lassen, a destroyer,
conducted a freedom of
navigation
operation just a few days ago.
So, this is something that the
region supports generally.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The freedom of
navigation idea, is it a right
that sort of use it or
lose it? If you don't use it, is
that kind of what we're
stressing here by having carrier
groups go through?
BONNIE GLASER: The United States
has been doing this of course
for centuries. And since
1979, it has had a freedom
of navigation program.
And, in fact, this is the
seventh what we call FONOP that
has been conducted since 2011
in the South China Sea. And,
yes, I think if the Navy does
not sail through, and not
just the U.S. Navy, but
Australia navy, Japan's navy
doesn't sail through waters that
are
high seas, that they are not
territorial seas of other
countries, even in territorial
seas,
we can sail through
making innocent passage.
And, in fact, that is really
what we did in this case. We
sailed through a territorial
sea of China's Subi Reef. So,
yes, you have to exercise it or
other countries may claim
it and may try to
exclude other navies.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Speaking of
other countries and their
claims, what have the other
countries
in the region that have vested
interests in these waters, what
have they been doing, besides
just China and the United States
that get kind of pinned in this
conversation?
BONNIE GLASER: Well, the
Philippines is trying to enhance
its capability to conduct what
we call better maritime domain
awareness, to know what's going
on inside its 200 nautical
mile exclusive economic zone.
And in fact Japan and the United
States has been providing some
capability. The same is
true with Vietnam. And the
thinking here is that if other
claimants know what's going
on inside their waters, that the
Chinese will be less apt to use
coercion against them.
Diplomatically, there's also
some steps being taken. The
Philippines has taken a very
important
case to the court under the U.N.
Convention of the Law of the
Sea, and there was just
an announcement today that the
merits of that case will be
heard at the end of November.
The court has already found
jurisdiction on a number of the
counts.
So, next year, there is going to
be likely a ruling that will
come down and that will
also have implications for the
behavior of China and other
countries going forward.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Now, does
China respect the decision of
that court?
BONNIE GLASER: China has already
said that this court doesn't
have jurisdiction and it
has said that its finding will
be null and void, it will reject
it.
But I do think that China cares
about its international
reputation, and so there is
a possibility that China will
reconsider that as we go
forward. I hope other countries
will
impose some more costs on China,
particularly in terms of its
coercive strategy in the region,
so that we can convince the
Chinese that they're playing at
an ineffective game.
They should have good relations
with their neighbors, rather
than exert their sovereignty
claims over these rocks and
reefs in the South China Sea
that I think are less important
to Chinese interests
over the long run.
HARI SREENIVASAN: How different
have China's actions been
compared to other people trying
to stake a claim? We had video
of newly developed airstrips on
some of these islands and even
military armaments that are
really kind of ramping up.
BONNIE GLASER: The Chinese do
see themselves as playing
catchup, because every other
claimant
in the South China Sea, with the
exception of Brunei, has an
airstrip.
They have all conducted a small
amount of land reclamation. That
is taking a land feature
and making it a little bit
bigger. The Chinese went in
there and dredged an enormous
amount
of sand and built these very
large artificial islands.
So now the Chinese occupy the
largest land feature, which is
three times larger than
the largest natural-produced
island in the area. The Chinese,
the scope of what they
have done, and now they will
have four airstrips in the South
China Sea. Their capability
really
outstrips every other claimant.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
Bonnie Glaser of the Center for
Strategic and International
Studies in Washington, thanks
so much for joining us.
BONNIE GLASER: Thank you.
HARI SREENIVASAN: During the
Cold War, the United States
built tens of thousands of
nuclear
weapons. Now that it's over and
with arms control treaties in
place, the arsenal has
shrunk significantly.
The Departments of Defense and
Energy say the remaining bombs
need to be rebuilt, but
critics say those departments
are building new nuclear bombs
and spending too much money.
Veteran correspondent Jamie
McIntyre, now Al-Jazeera
America's national security
correspondent,
went on special assignment for
the "NewsHour" to examine the
claims.
The story was produced in
partnership with the Pulitzer
Center on Crisis Reporting.
JAMIE MCINTYRE: At Eglin Air
Force Base, a solitary F-15
takes to the skies over the
swamps of Western Florida on a
mission that hearkens back to
the Cold War.
It looks like any old-fashioned
gravity bomb as it falls to
earth. But what you're seeing
is one small part of an $8
billion project, the most
extensive and expensive
improvement
ever to the B-61 nuclear bomb.
It's a nuclear test of sorts
without a mushroom cloud,
because
what's being tried out is a new
guidance system to increase
accuracy.
The first test mission was
flown by pilot Jeff Searcy.
MAJ. JEFF SEARCY, U.S. Air
Force: We are able to enter in
coordinates into our system and
then transfer those coordinates
into the weapon now. And the
weapon is built to be able to
guide to those coordinates.
NARRATOR: This is a B-61 bomb, a
lightweight two-stage
thermonuclear weapon.
JAMIE MCINTYRE: The B-61 was
designed and first built in the
early 1960s. As this vintage
Air Force film shows, it lacked
any of today high-tech guidance
systems, relying on a parachute
to give the plane time
to escape the blast.
A half-century later, it's still
the mainstay of the Air Force's
nuclear arsenal, long overdue
for an overhaul, argues Major
General Garrett Harencak.
MAJ. GEN. GARRETT HARENCAK, U.S.
Air Force: These components age,
just like any component
would in an automobile or in an
appliance, and it has certain
aspects of it that just
have to be modernized.
JAMIE MCINTYRE: The "PBS
NewsHour" was given exclusive
and unprecedented access to the
labs and facilities across the
country involved in the
multibillion-dollar makeover,
such
as the National Security Campus
in Kansas City, where crash
tests help determine the
durability of key components.
The B-61 is just one program in
a $100 billion effort dubbed
stockpile stewardship, an
ambitious
plan that includes modernizing
America's remaining arsenal of
1,500 nuclear bombs and
warheads.
At Sandia National Laboratory in
New Mexico, senior engineer Brad
Boswell showed me the
obsolete analog innards of the
old 1960s version of the bomb.
So, one of the things that was
surprising to me was that we
still have nuclear weapons
using vacuum tubes, like the
ones we had in our old TVs.
BRAD BOSWELL, Sandia National
Laboratories: That is correct.
JAMIE MCINTYRE: And so this kind
vacuum tube is now part of this
printed circuit board?
BRAD BOSWELL: That is correct.
As you look at this printed
circuit board, vacuum tubes
like this are replaced by the
smaller, commonly used
electronic, discrete components
that
you see on these boards today.
JAMIE MCINTYRE: While many of
the components of the B-61 are
being upgraded and modernized,
the big change is the addition
of this tail fin kit, which
allows the bomb to be guided
to its target, a big improvement
over the old system that
deployed a parachute, which
floated the bomb
down to the ground.
It won't make the bomb as
precise as a GPS-guided smart
bomb, but it will increase its
accuracy.
You might think that with all
their destructive power, nuclear
weapons wouldn't need to hit
a target dead center. But the
B-61 has a feature dubbed
dial-a-yield, which allows its
explosive
force to be reduced. And when
combined with better accuracy,
that results in a weapon
war-fighters might actually be
tempted to use on the
battlefield.
In his Washington office, Hans
Kristensen, with the Federation
of American Scientists,
called up a Web site
to show me an example.
HANS KRISTENSEN, Federation of
American Scientists: Here you
have, the White House itself is
gone,
and so is much of the downtown
area, but a much smaller radius.
JAMIE MCINTYRE: Smaller blast
area, less radiation, fewer
casualties, all add up to a more
palatable
last-resort option, argues
Kristensen, making the B-61 less
deadly, but, perversely, more
dangerous.
HANS KRISTENSEN: It's more
likely that a military commander
will go to the president with
this
weapon and say, Mr. President,
all our other options are out of
the question, but we have
a good one here that doesn't
pollute a whole lot.
JAMIE MCINTYRE: It's one thing
for an arms control advocates to
make that case, but another
when the former top commander of
America's nuclear forces to
agree.
Retired Vice Chairman of the
Joint Chiefs Marine General
James Cartwright supports the
B-61 upgrade, but can see how it
could change the calculus in a
crisis.
GEN. JAMES CARTWRIGHT (RET.),
Former Vice Chairman of the
Joint Chiefs: If I can drive
down the yield, drive down,
therefore, the likelihood of
fallout, et cetera, does that
make it more usable in the eyes
of some -- some president or
national security
decision-making
process? And the answer is, it
likely could be more usable.
JAMIE MCINTYRE: The Pentagon
argues making nuclear weapons
more usable makes them a more
realistic threat, thereby
increasing their deterrent value
and decreasing the risk of
miscalculation.
Donald Cook is a deputy
administrator at the National
Nuclear Security Administration,
which is overseeing
the B-61 project:
DONALD COOK, Deputy
Administrator, National Nuclear
Security Administration: If we
have
a weapon that is lower-yield and
greater accuracy, and our
adversaries know that, it's my
own
belief that that weapon then is
a more effective deterrent and
is, therefore, less likely to
ever be used in anger.
JAMIE MCINTYRE: The Pentagon is
careful to portray the new B-61
as basically the same
old bomb with just a few more
modern parts. That's a key
point, since the Obama
administration
had pledged not to build
new nuclear weapons.
But officials also stress
they're making the bomb safer
and more reliable. At Los Alamos
National Laboratory, engineers
are testing a new high-explosive
material that's used
to trigger the nuclear chain
reaction in the B-61 warhead.
It's called insensitive high
explosive, insensitive because
it's really hard to detonate,
just what you want in a
nuclear warhead.
The standard for nuclear weapons
is always/never, as in, they
must always work when they
should,
and never when they shouldn't.
Critics of the B-61 say they
have no objection to making
nuclear weapons safer, but they
allege the Energy Department
labs that rebuild the weapons
have a financial motive,
lobbying Congress, sometimes
with government money, to
approve
lucrative contracts.
Jay Coghlan is with Nuclear
Watch New Mexico, an
anti-nuclear watchdog group.
JAY COGHLAN, Nuclear Watch New
Mexico: The American taxpayers
should know that the directors
of these nuclear weapons
laboratories that are pushing
these extreme proposals actually
have an inherent
conflict of interests.
They're both the lab directors,
but at the same time they're the
presidents of corporations
running the labs. It's in their
interests and their bottom line
to be able to have these
life extension programs.
JAMIE MCINTYRE: At Sandia,
deputy laboratory director Steve
Rottler said his people believe
they are performing a vital
national security function.
STEVE ROTTLER, Sandia National
Laboratories: We very much view
what we're doing as a public
service. We approach it with
objectivity. We approach it with
the sober understanding
of what we're doing and the
impact of what that could mean
if these weapons were ever
used.
JAMIE MCINTYRE: Critics like to
point out the estimated $20
million price tag for a
single retooled B-61 is more
than if the 700-pound bomb were
made out of solid gold. And they
argue the billions could be
better spent on more
conventional arms, weapons that
will
be used every day.
That argument rankles Air Force
General Harencak, who says
deterring potential adversaries
is
a real return on investment.
MAJ. GEN. GARRETT HARENCAK:
Eight-point-one billion dollars
is a lot of money, but what
you can't do is just take the
number of missiles and divide it
by 8.1 and say, OK, this is
the cost. This is a weapon that
is going to be used every single
day in a deterrent mission.
So, when you add that over 40
years, find out, I think you
come to the realization that
it's a pretty good bargain
for the American people.
JAMIE MCINTYRE: The cost of the
program has already doubled once
from the initial estimate,
and one internal Pentagon review
back in 2012 suggested the final
cost could end up higher.
Whatever the price tag, the B-61
will be the Pentagon's most
expensive bomb project ever.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Jamie McIntyre, Eglin Air Force
Base, Florida.
HARI SREENIVASAN: There's a lot
more about the remaking of
America's nuclear arsenal
on our Web site. We have
extended excerpts of all the key
interviews, plus a photo essay,
all that at PBS.org/NewsHour.
Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
Making Sense of co-working
spaces in a freelance economy;
and the first President Bush
slams Donald Rumsfeld and Dick
Cheney in Jon Meacham's
"Destiny and Power."
But, first, it's been more than
a year since actor and comedian
Robin Williams died. But
new details shared this week by
his widow are calling attention
to a form of dementia
that has received little
public focus until now.
William Brangham has the story.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: After Robin
Williams took his own life, his
press representative said
Williams was battling severe
depression. His widow, Susan
Schneider Williams, also said
back then that he was struggling
with depression and early stages
of Parkinson's disease
But this week, Mrs. Williams
told ABC News and "People"
magazine that an autopsy
revealed
something else. He had what is
known as Lewy body dementia. She
described battling a mysterious
set of symptoms for a year,
something she compared to
playing Whac-A-Mole -- quote --
"They
present themselves like a
pinball machine," she said. "You
don't know exactly what you're
looking at. I have spent this
last year trying to find out
what killed Robin, because we
didn't know. He didn't know."
Joining me now to help us
understand more about this
disease is neurologist Dr. James
Galvin. He's a professor and
associate dean for clinical
research at Florida Atlantic
University.
Dr. Galvin, thank
you for joining us.
It seems that before this news
about Robin Williams broke, most
of us had never heard
of this disease. Can you tell
me a little bit more about it?
DR. JAMES GALVIN, Florida
Atlantic University: Sure.
So, Lewy body dementia may be
the most common disease you have
never heard of. It's the
second most common cause of
memory problems after
Alzheimer's disease and affects
over
1.3 million Americans. Its
predominant symptoms are a
progressive change in memory and
other
thinking functions, signs of
Parkinson's, so, slow movement,
stiffness, balance problems,
visual hallucinations, seeing
things that aren't there, like
little people or furry
little animals, fluctuations in
levels of attention,
concentration, and, lastly, a
sleep
disorder where people
act out their dreams.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Among that
huge array of symptoms, I'm
curious about the particular
visual hallucinations you
described. Is that common for a
certain type of dementia to have
such specific hallucinations?
DR. JAMES GALVIN: It's very
common in Lewy body dementia.
Typically, if other dementias,
other memory problems develop
hallucinations, they're not
until much later in the course
of the disease, and the
hallucinations are not so
well-formed.
What's particularly
characteristic of Lewy body
dementia are these very
well-formed hallucinations.
They're usually not frightening
initially to the patient, but
they are very well-formed.
They usually can describe
exactly what they're seeing.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Is it partially
because -- it sounds like the
symptoms seem to mimic
Alzheimer's
and other diseases. Is that why
this is such a difficult to
diagnose?
DR. JAMES GALVIN:
That's exactly why.
Early on, some of the symptoms
may mimic other diseases, like
Alzheimer's if it's just the
memory problems, Parkinson's
disease, if it's the movement
problems, or a psychiatric
disease
like schizophrenia if
it's the hallucinations.
It really takes an experienced
clinician to be able to be able
to put all the pieces together
and come up with the diagnosis.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: So, is this a
degenerative disease? And is
there any cure? Does it just
get worse, or is there any
prognosis that is a hopeful one?
DR. JAMES GALVIN: Well, it is a
progressive degenerative
disease, and we do not have a
cure for it yet.
We can effectively treat many of
the symptoms of the disease
using medicines for other
diseases.
So, for example, we can use the
medicines that are used in
Alzheimer's disease and
Parkinson's
disease and schizophrenia to
treat the individual symptoms,
but I think it takes a very
careful,
individualized approach to
decide which is the best regimen
of medicines for each patient.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Robin
Williams' widow described
battling these symptoms as akin
to playing
the game Whac-A-Mole. Is that
similar to what you have heard
from other parents, that it's
this very mysterious, hard thing
to pin down, you just don't know
what's coming at you?
DR. JAMES GALVIN: It can be very
mysterious and very difficult
and challenging for the
patients and the families and
for the clinicians, frankly.
As the symptoms begin to appear,
it really takes a while to kind
of sort out what is
going on. With the Lewy Body
Dementia Association, we had
conducted a survey over 950
caregivers
to try to understand the
diagnostic experience. And what
we found was up to an 18-month
delay,
with patients seeing multiple
doctors over multiple visits,
before finally getting a
correct diagnosis.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: I understand
that there is some question
about whether people who
suffer from Lewy body dementia
might be more at risk to harm
themselves or to commit suicide.
Can you tell me a little bit
about that? Why would that be
and is that true?
DR. JAMES GALVIN: Well, there's
no evidence that any of the
dementias, Lewy body dementia
or Alzheimer's disease, for that
matter, by themselves increase
the risk of people committing
suicide.
Now, for some individuals, when
they hear they have a chronic
disease and they're trying
to deal with a chronic disease,
and maybe the diagnosis isn't
given or isn't correct
at the time, and their symptoms
aren't responding, people can
make decisions to harm
themselves.
But the disease itself is not
associated with a higher risk of
suicide.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: I see.
So, looking forward, I mean, is
there any optimism that we're at
the cusp of a treatment
for this type of a disease?
DR. JAMES GALVIN: Well, I think
there is great room for
optimism. We know more and more
about
the disease. We understand more
and more about the abnormal
proteins that aggregate or clump
together, that cause the
changes in the brain.
And so now this is beginning to
allow us to develop medications
that may have some effect.
Very recently, several companies
have made announcements that
they're beginning specific
clinical trials to treat Lewy
body dementia. And these would
be the first medicines
specifically
indicated for treating
Lewy body diseases.
So, I think there is great
optimism. I think it's important
that patients remain hopeful
and families remain hopeful and
stay engaged and advocate for
their loved ones, so that
we can get more research funding
to develop new treatments.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: All right, Dr.
James Galvin of Florida Atlantic
University, thank you
very much.
DR. JAMES GALVIN: Thank you.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The latest
jobs report is due out tomorrow,
and, once again, it's expected
to show a large percentage of
people who are now
self-employed.
A New York-based start-up has
come up with a new business
model that rents office and
work spaces to freelancers and
others. And it's growing. The
company announced a new
round of fund-raising this week
as it opens more locations
around the country, as well
as in England, Israel
and the Netherlands.
But the company's premise also
raises some fundamental
questions about the
transformation
of the workplace.
Economics correspondent Paul
Solman has the story, as part of
our weekly series Making
Sense, which airs every
Thursday on the "NewsHour."
PAUL SOLMAN: Entrepreneur
Jonathan Smalley and Cinna,
short for Cinnamon, at Smalley's
Washington, D.C., office, space
he rents by the month from what
may be the hottest new
landlord in America.
JONATHAN SMALLEY, CEO, Brilliant
Collaborations: If you're having
a tough day, being able to
cuddle up a couch with a cute
dog really makes things that
much better.
LILY BRYNES, Lily SPOTS NYC: We
actually put any type of photo,
logo or message on top
of the cupcake, so
there's some for you.
(LAUGHTER)
PAUL SOLMAN: Lily Brynes runs
Lily SPOTS NYC, whose
mini-cupcakes can be topped with
edible
images of literally anything.
So, this is edible, all edible?
LILY BRYNES: Everything
is edible. Bottoms up.
PAUL SOLMAN: You work
out of this facility?
LILY BRYNES: We are e-commerce
for now. And we are based here.
We work on the second floor,
and it's just our office. We
have two kitchens, but we do all
of the back-end work here.
PAUL SOLMAN: Developer of
cloud-based math tutoring
software Dave Joo has a
Manhattan
nook too.
DAVID JOO, Developer: They have
really discovered the secret
sauce on how to make this place
feel hip, feel new, feel
innovative. Having guests come
into this environment actually
adds a real sense of, hey, we're
a larger company than we
actually are.
PAUL SOLMAN: These folks all
rent office space from WeWork,
co-founded by designer Miguel
McKelvey in 2010.
The thinking was that, given the
swelling ranks of the
self-employed, why not lease
and then spiff up empty
buildings, subdivide the space
and sublet it, in units as small
as one desk, while providing
amenities and camaraderie to
attract contingent workers?
MIGUEL MCKELVEY, Co-Founder,
WeWork: If we unite them
together, bring them together,
that creates some energies that
motivates everybody to do
better, to do more, to be
excited about both
work and life.
PAUL SOLMAN: Plus, it gives them
a legal address for mail and the
like, an instant network
of fellow freelancers, a large
enough pool of people to buy
into group health care plans.
McKelvey's is the sunny spin on
housing the
free-to-be-you-and-me work
force. But Brooklyn
College humanities dean Richard
Greenwald takes a dimmer view of
the growing trend.
RICHARD GREENWALD, Brooklyn
College: More and more companies
are hiring freelancers.
Right now, we have 40 percent of
the work force working
contingently, without any safety
net.
PAUL SOLMAN: Greenwald is a
historian of the workplace and
has been studying the new
economy
for an upcoming book
called "The Death of 9-5."
Almost half of all current
American workers, he has
discovered, now get the bulk of
their
income from freelance
work, benefit-free.
RICHARD GREENWALD: I'm
hard-pressed to see a sector of
the economy where outsourcing
isn't having a huge impact. And
I think for many Americans, they
think of it as a temporary
thing. Eventually, people are
going to have to recognize that
this is not an in-between
stage. This is the new normal.
PAUL SOLMAN: But to Greenwald,
the insecurity of contingent
work without benefits isn't
normal at all. The premise of
WeWork, however, is that if
outsourcing is inexorable, at
least
the outsourced have a cool and
convenient place to set up shop.
Anastasia Morozova does
marketing for a start-up real
estate firm. Why doesn't she
telecommute
for free from home
or at Starbucks?
ANASTASIA MOROZOVA, Curzon Real
Estate: Too many distractions.
One could say that there
are distractions in a space like
this, but they're the good kind.
It's everyone working.
It's coffee and spa water on
draft, beer after 5:00. It's a
good space to feel energetic
and inspired to get work done.
PAUL SOLMAN: Am I being too
negative to think that what
you're doing is providing
community
for people who would otherwise
be lonely, as opposed to
inspiring people and giving
them meaning, whereas they
couldn't come up with meaning on
their own?
MIGUEL MCKELVEY: Well,
certainly, there's components of
both of those things, but as
an entrepreneur who had spent
time working at home, I could
have all the ideas in my
head, and they could all be
incredibly genius, amazing
things that inspired me all day.
But
without someone to share
that with, where does it go?
PAUL SOLMAN: So, WeWork chose
spaces to maximize mingling.
MIGUEL MCKELVEY: Most of our
buildings are on corners. We
choose buildings that have
great daylight, because that
makes people feel good.
PAUL SOLMAN: And then McKelvey
designed the spaces to further
spur interaction.
MIGUEL MCKELVEY: At the expense
of convenience, we will
sometimes make, you know, people
walk
further, make people walk
through a space in order to just
potentially have the opportunity
to see more people doing
different things. Maybe there is
someone doing a whiskey tasting
over there or there is a cold
brew thing here or there is
someone presenting on the screen
over there. Maybe I will take a
minute and go check that out.
PAUL SOLMAN: And so glass-walled
offices, festooned with funky
furniture, the inevitable
ping-pong table, fussball, a
quiet room when it all becomes a
bit much, free coffee all
day, of course, and beer on tap
at beer hour, which kicks off at
5:00 p.m.
So the coffee is to keep people
working hard and to stay awake,
but the alcohol is to...
MIGUEL MCKELVEY: Lubricate.
PAUL SOLMAN: To lubricate.
(LAUGHTER)
MIGUEL MCKELVEY: Yes.
PAUL SOLMAN: To
lubricate community?
MIGUEL MCKELVEY: Yes.
PAUL SOLMAN: WeWork isn't the
only firm housing the
self-employed these days. Not
long ago,
I flailed away against real
estate developer Ashish Dua of
Acumen Capital, which buys and
refurbishes manufacturing
buildings, like this former
Pfizer pharmaceutical plant in
Brooklyn.
It now houses a host of
artisanal food vendors, a maker
of handmade dog leashes. But
WeWork
targets office workers. And it's
a phenomenon, growing
exponentially, 56 locations in
cities as disparate as London
and Tel Aviv. The company added
two more sites just during
the week we were shooting.
The company was valued earlier
this year at $5 billion. But
within six months, the valuation
doubled to $10 billion. As
"Bloomberg" magazine points out,
however, you could build and own
the World Trade Center building,
with three million square feet
of office space, almost
as many square feet as WeWork
temporarily leases, for only $4
billion. WeWork owns no
space of its own and took out
leases when rents were cheap.
What happens to its costs when
it has to renew in a hot rental
market? What about just
collecting
the rent, given the fact that
most start-ups fail? In other
words, a contingent work force
could be a problem for WeWork,
and perhaps, says Professor
Greenwald, for us all.
RICHARD GREENWALD: If we're
moving to this entrepreneurial
utopia, where everyone's their
own boss, those who are lucky
can be successful and march up
the chain. But most of America
is not going to be, and that's
what I'm troubled by, as this
pattern continues.
PAUL SOLMAN: But, for the
moment, WeWork tenants like Lily
Brynes embrace the new freelance
economy.
Do you feel vulnerable being a
member of the contingent work
force? That is, you're a
freelancer.
LILY BRYNES: I don't necessarily
feel vulnerable. If anything, I
just try to capitalize on being
around all of these other
freelancers, because my business
is all edible marketing. And
when
you are in an environment full
of companies and people looking
to gift people with unique
-- unique things like this, it
just always works in my
advantage.
PAUL SOLMAN: So, what's next for
McKelvey and his team at WeWork?
This building in Arlington,
Virginia is being repurposed for
micro-apartments, 360 square
feet or less, with common
kitchens
and living space, branded as
WeLive, and a brand-new WeWork
space will be in the same
building, a lot like
a college dorm.
In New York, New York, this is
economics correspondent Paul
Solman, still with a full-time
job, reporting
for the "PBS NewsHour."
HARI SREENIVASAN: Biographies
don't always make news, but a
new book on George H.W. Bush
is garnering headlines across
the country today for how Bush
41 felt about his son's
response to the 9/11 attacks and
subsequent invasion of Iraq,
among other things.
The book will not be published
until next week, but we have an
early look. For "Destiny
and Power: The American Odyssey
of George Herbert Walker Bush,"
Jon Meacham, the executive
editor at Random House, relied
not only on extensive interviews
of the president's family,
staff, and friends, but also on
the nearly daily audio diaries
the president recorded
while in the White House.
Judy Woodruff talked with him
earlier this week for the
"NewsHour" Bookshelf.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Jon
Meacham, welcome.
JON MEACHAM, Author, "Destiny
and Power: The American Odyssey
of George Herbert Walker
Bush": Thank you, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You had
extraordinary, maybe
unprecedented access to this
president, all
of his diaries, Barbara Bush's
diaries, the ability to
interview almost everybody in
the
family. Why do you think they
trusted you with all this?
JON MEACHAM: Well, I hope they
felt that I would call it like I
saw it, which was the
sort of the mandate
from the president.
JUDY WOODRUFF: A life of
privilege. I mean, he certainly
grew up in this family involved
in politics, great wealth, but
he also had a sense of
responsibility from a very early
age. What do you
think shaped him?
JON MEACHAM: Well, you know, he
comes out of the same world of
noblesse oblige that
shaped Theodore Roosevelt and
Franklin Roosevelt, and,
frankly, some of the founding
fathers.
You could argue that, culturally
and temperamentally, George H.W.
Bush has more in common with the
founders than he does with his
successors generationally, in
terms of their life experience.
You know, his mother was hugely
important. She was very
religious and very competitive
in equal parts, I think,
it's safe to say.
And he believed in the doctrine,
to whom much is given, much is
expected. What's really
interesting, I think -- and I
hadn't realized this until I got
into Mrs. Bush's diary -- is
that there was an expectation,
there was a sense that he could
be president, that that
possibility was within the realm
of the probable, as early as the
1950s.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You -- there's so
much about him and his
relationship, of course, with
his family, with Ronald Reagan,
who -- he was vice president to
Reagan for eight years.
And, of course, his son went on
to be president for eight years.
But he was very different from
them. And this touches on what
you said a minute ago. I mean,
his view of politics was more of
a pragmatic, rather than an
ideological...
JON MEACHAM: Absolutely.
Absolutely.
Labels are for cans,
he used to say.
(LAUGHTER)
JON MEACHAM: And, you know, you
look at where we are now, and he
was part of this for a
half-century. Mrs. Bush said in
1963, right before he first ran
for the Senate in 1964,
that the nuts will
never love him.
And they were talking about the
John Birch Society back then.
The Republican base was
always wary of George H.W. Bush.
In 1980, he called Reaganomics
voodoo economics.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
JON MEACHAM: In 1988, he lost
Iowa. You know, the party had
always -- the conservative part
of the party had always
been uneasy with him.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And he was the
one, after saying during the
campaign, "Read my lips, no new
taxes," he went on to be elected
president, but when he saw the
budget deficit was out
of control, he raised taxes.
JON MEACHAM: Right.
Mike Dukakis told me a great
story, that, when they met after
the election, Bush said,
"Well, I won't be able to raise
taxes in the first year." And
Dukakis thought: "In the
first year? I just lost to this
guy saying he'd never raise
taxes."
JUDY WOODRUFF: It was
interesting. You talked to him,
of course, about what happened
in
his presidency and how he was
devastated by the loss. I mean,
he thought, I guess
understandably,
that this was a
reflection of him.
JON MEACHAM: He thought he
was a failed president.
I open the book on election
night 1992, and I would argue
that, in many ways, the 20th
century ended on November 3,
1992, when Bill Clinton, the
first baby boomer president,
defeats George H.W. Bush, the
last World War II president.
And Bush really just doesn't
quite get it, not in the sense
that we all remember he was
out of -- seemed out of touch
about the economy. That is not
-- that's not true. In fact, he
knew the economy was going to
be a hugely important issue.
But he says to his tape-recorded
diary, by himself, sitting in
the Houstonian Hotel:
"Duty, honor, country, I always
thought that's what Americans
were made of, but, quite
plainly,
it's not."
He was just subsumed with
anguish that he had not been
able to finish the job.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I do want to ask
you, Jon Meacham, about what he
says about his son, President
Bush 43, President
George W. Bush.
He's very supportive, loves his
son. But you get him to talk
about how he was really
uncomfortable
with what he called too much
hawkishness. He didn't like the
-- he didn't like the axis
of evil.
JON MEACHAM: Right. He said,
"Historically, I don't think
that will be -- will benefit
anything."
He didn't like the swaggering
rhetoric of his son's
administration.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And then
the Dick Cheney...
JON MEACHAM: Right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You know, who he
-- turns out he felt was -- had
too much influence in his
son's administration.
JON MEACHAM: George H.W. Bush
said that he believed that
Cheney was responsible for a
good bit of that hawkish image,
and that he wished that Cheney
had not had as much influence,
that he -- that Dick Cheney
should have had his -- quote --
"own State Department," and
that vice presidents
shouldn't do that.
When I took that to Vice
President Cheney, he read it and
said, "Fascinating."
JUDY WOODRUFF: But when you took
it to President Bush 43, George
W. Bush, what did he say?
JON MEACHAM: Well, he said that
he had never -- his father had
never said that to him.
He said it would have been out
of character for his father to
say, "Hey, you have got
to rein in Cheney, he's ruining
your administration, that that
conversation never took place.
JUDY WOODRUFF: He was publicly
supportive of going into Iraq,
the decision to invade
Iraq in 2003, but he clearly
had misgivings about it.
JON MEACHAM: He had what a
friend called anxieties. He was
anxious about it.
He also privately wrote his son
a note, saying that if the man
won't comply, meaning Saddam,
then you have to do what you
have to do. And one of the
things about that I think
historically
is important is, George H.W.
Bush had his own war with
Saddam, in which he was quite
unilateral. He was willing --
one of the things that emerges
in the president's diary is
that,
on five or six different
occasions, he talks about how he
would be willing to be
impeached,
that, even if the Congress said
in 1990-'91, we're not
authorizing the use of force, he
was willing to go.
And the first Bush to talk about
Saddam in terms of good vs. evil
wasn't George W. Bush...
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
JON MEACHAM: ... but Bush 41.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Was -- was
this -- was the father.
JON MEACHAM: Right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And yet he went
on to have, as you said,
anxieties about what his son
did after 9/11.
JON MEACHAM: One of the key
things about Bush 41 is the
sense of deference to whomever
the
president happens to
be at a given moment.
He believed that his son was
confronting something that no
president since Lincoln had
done,
which was warfare
on American soil.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And you have
talked to him a lot since he
left office, which was, what,
23 years ago.
JON MEACHAM: Yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What does he say
about the hyper-partisanship in
Washington now?
JON MEACHAM: It worries him
enormously, because he -- and he
saw it happen as he was
governing.
It happened right around him.
I mean, the rise of Gingrich,
the rise of freelance
partisanship happened when he
was
willing to take the political
heat, break the "Read my lips"
pledge, do what he thought
was best for the country.
That's one of the key things
about George Bush, is, no matter
how you feel about how
he campaigned -- and he was a
tough campaigner -- in fact, he
talks in his diary about, "I'm
stronger, I'm tougher. If I had
kept letting the press define me
as a wimp or a loser,
I wouldn't be here,
almost winning in 1988."
But once he was in office, he
tried to put the country first,
and he acted against his
own political interest. The
great example is the 1990 budget
deal. He had run against
raising taxes. He got into it.
He saw he needed to, so he did
that. And he knew at the time
that it could cost
him reelection.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You said to me,
just finally, a moment ago this
may be the last time a president
gives this kind of access while
he or she is still alive.
JON MEACHAM: It's possible.
It's -- these kind of diaries
are unique. He kept audio
diaries throughout his --
episodically
as vice president, and then
fairly regularly as president.
There are all sorts of legal
issues with that and
who listens to them.
But this is as close as many of
us, I think, are going to get to
actually sitting in the
Oval Office. This is him talking
at moments of great triumph, at
moments of tragedy. It's
a remarkable historical
document, his presidential
diary, because it's as high
politics really
is, but we so rarely get
to see. And, here, we do.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The book is
"Destiny and Power: The American
Odyssey of George Herbert Walker
Bush,"
Jon Meacham, thank you
for bringing it to us.
JON MEACHAM: Thank you, Judy.
HARI SREENIVASAN: On the
"NewsHour" online: This week on
our podcast Shortwave, a Reuters
investigation uncovers what it
calls a covert radio network
here in the U.S. that features
China-friendly news allegedly
engineered by the Chinese
government. It's part of what
one expert calls China's soft
power push. Listen to the
report. We have a link to the
podcast on our home page.
And join us tomorrow for a
Twitter chat on your wildest
dreams. We will have a panel
of sleep experts answering
questions on why we dream and
how it affects our sleep. Find
us on Twitter at 1:00 p.m.
Eastern time. Details are also
on our home page. That's
PBS.org/NewsHour.
Tune in later tonight on
"Charlie Rose." Director Sam
Mendes and actor Daniel Craig
offer a
sneak preview of "Spectre," the
24th film in the James Bond
franchise.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight. I'm Hari Sreenivasan.
Join us online and again here
tomorrow evening with Mark
Shields and David Brooks.
For all of us here at the
"NewsHour," thank you, and good
night.